Add 3.3.0 announcement (#1505)
scala/scala-lang: blog/_posts/2023-05-26-scala-3.3.0-released.md

### Known incompatibility: Stability of inline parameters

In Scala, only stable paths can be used as prefix in path-dependent types.

```Scala
class Outer:
  type Inner

val a = new Outer
val aInner: a.Inner = ???     // ok

var b = new Outer
// val bInner: b.Inner = ???  // error

def c = new Outer
// val cInner: c.Inner = ???  // error

def method(param: Outer): param.Inner = ???  // ok
```

There was a bug that resulted in the compiler assuming that all inline parameters are stable references. This could have led to unsound code being accepted by the compiler and potential runtime crashes.

```Scala
inline def method(inline param: Outer): param.Inner // error in Scala 3.3.0
```

> Such pieces of code are now rejected by the compiler. The migration for that change is simple, as it only requires removing the `inline` modifier **from the parameter**. If the path-dependent type was used, it is safe to say that the intended behavior was to inline the method without inlining the parameter.

Reviewer: TODO: Contributors list

- `-Wunused:imports` - for unused imports
- `-Wunused:privates` - for unused local definitions
- `-Wunused:locals`  - for unused local definitions
- `-Wunused:explicits` - for unused explicit parameters
- `-Wunused:implicits` - for unused implicit parameters (parameters in `using` clauses)
- `-Wunused:params` - for all unused method parameters
- `-Wunused:all` - for enabling all of the above lints

#### Checking for discarded values

Discarding non-unit values is usually the symptom of subtle mistakes. The compiler can now warn you about all discarded values saving you from bugs resulting from those hard-to-spot mistakes.

In the following simplified example

```Scala
def failure: Either[String, Nothing] = Left("something broke")

def failedComputation: Either[String, Unit] =
  Right(()).map(_ => failure)
```

the programmer, by mistake, used the `map` method instead of `flatMap`. The code still compiles, but due to value discarding, behaves unexpectedly, returning `Right(())` from the `failedComputation` method. If the `-Wvalue-discard` flag is enabled, the compiler will report the warning, saving the user from a potential bug.

### More consistent braceless syntax

> Braces around method parameters can now be replaced with a colon. This can lead to cleaner, shorter, and often more readable code in places like configuration DSLs or test case definitions.

Reviewer 2: Given the controversial nature of Optional Brace, and now More Braceless syntax, it might be beneficial for both the maintainers and the readers to expand the context around this feature a bit, namely who proposed it, when, why, and how it was discussed and vetted (for example it was approved by SIP process in August 2022).

---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Paweł Marks, VirtusLab
title: Scala 3.3.0 released!
---

> ![Scala 3.3]({{ site.baseurl }}/resources/img/scala-3.3-launch.png)

Reviewer 3: The image is missing.

We are thrilled to announce that after long months of work and careful testing, we have released Scala 3.3.0 LTS.

## What does "LTS" mean?

Scala 3.3.0 is the first Long Term Support (LTS) release. That means that it will be actively maintained for a period of at least three years. We have adopted a release model similar to the one that Java has successfully used for a long time.

> In the following years, there will be new minor releases (3.4, 3.5, and so on) that can bring new backward-compatible features. We are calling them Scala Next; they are equivalent to Java's feature releases. Bugfixes and usability improvements from those releases will be backported and released as 3.3.x patches. Apart from those forward and backward-compatible changes, LTS will be feature frozen.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the following years, there will be new minor releases (3.4, 3.5, and so on) that can bring new backward-compatible features. We are calling them Scala Next; they are equivalent to Java's feature releases. Bug fixes and usability improvements from those releases will be back-ported and released as 3.3.x patches. Apart from those forward and backward-compatible changes, LTS will be feature frozen.
```

The LTS model doesn't change anything in our compatibility guarantees. Projects built with all future releases will be able to depend on any library compiled with Scala 3.3.x. This is just our standard guarantee that the newer compiler can always consume the output of the older version.

LTS might be a great choice for library authors who can now receive constant bug fixes and developer experience improvements without forcing the users of the library to update the compiler version in their project.

You can read more about our compatibility guarantees in [the recent blog post](https://virtuslab.com/blog/the-scala-3-compatibility-story/).

> ## What's new in Scala 3.3.0

Reviewer 5: Consider using the following explicit subsections for this section:

1. Language changes
2. Developer experience improvements
3. Standard library additions

We must make extra clear what is language and what is not language, as it confuses users too often.

Reviewer 6: We should make things clear what is a language feature for sure, but maybe we can have some tags instead? The sections might comprise of a single point, so that seems very formal for the sake of it being formal.

Reviewer 5: I think having a section with a single point is good. It makes it very obvious that there is actually very little that changes in the language (contrary to what we can read left and right).

### Linting

> Scala 3.3.0 brings back the linting to the Scala compiler.  Right now, you can enable checking for unused symbols and discarded values. More linting options will come soon in the following Scala 3.3.x releases.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure about “the linting”. Should we just say “linting”?

Also, I think it would be good to mention that our goal with this work is to ease the migration to Scala 3.

Reviewer 7: > Should we just say “linting”?

Yes

Reviewer 8: Amelia Bedelia says to call it "delinting". It's like dusting the furniture when you intended to undust it.

#### Checking for unused values

There is an entire family of compiler options added in 3.3.0 for checking and reporting different kinds of unused symbols:

- `-Wunused:imports` - for unused imports
- `-Wunused:privates` - for unused local definitions
- `-Wunused:locals`  - for unused local definitions
- `-Wunused:explicits` - for unused explicit parameters
- `-Wunused:implicits` - for unused implicit parameters (parameters in `using` clauses)
- `-Wunused:params` - for all unused method parameters
- `-Wunused:all` - for enabling all of the above lints

#### Checking for discarded values

Discarding non-unit values is usually the symptom of subtle mistakes. The compiler can now warn you about all discarded values saving you from bugs resulting from those hard-to-spot mistakes.

In the following simplified example

```Scala
def failure: Either[String, Nothing] = Left("something broke")

def failedComputation: Either[String, Unit] =
  Right(()).map(_ => failure)
```

> the programmer, by mistake, used the `map` method instead of `flatMap`. The code still compiles, but due to value discarding, behaves unexpectedly, returning `Right(())` from the `failedComputation` method. If the `-Wvalue-discard` flag is enabled, the compiler will report the warning, saving the user from a potential bug.

Reviewer 3: Would it be possible to show the compiler output in such a case?

> ### More consistent brace-less syntax

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### More consistent braceless syntax
```

Braces around method parameters can now be replaced with a colon. This can lead to cleaner, shorter, and often more readable code in places like configuration DSLs or test case definitions.

```Scala
def canFail(input: String) = Try:
  someComputation(input).flatMap: res =>
    val partial = moreComputation(res)
    andEvenMore(partial)

class TestSuite extends munit.FunSuite:
  test("the job doesn't fail"):
    val job = canFail("some data")
    assert(job.isSuccess)
```

### `boundary` and `break`

> Two new methods were added to the standard library in the place: `boundary` and `brake`. They are safer and more expressive replacements for recently deprecated non-local returns.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Two new methods were added to the standard library in the place: `boundary` and `break`. They are safer and more expressive replacements for recently deprecated non-local returns.
```

Reviewer 3: It seems something is missing after “in the place”, did you mean “in place of `scala.util.control.Breaks` and `scala.util.control.NonLocalReturns`”?

> Two new methods were added to the standard library in the place: `boundary` and `brake`. They are safer and more expressive replacements for recently deprecated non-local returns.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Two new methods were added to the standard library in the place: `boundary` and `brake`. They are safer and more expressive replacements for non-local returns, which were deprecated recently.
```

`break` allows for a type-safe early escape from anywhere inside the block delimited by `boundary` to its end, returning the passed value from the entire block.

```Scala
import util.boundary, boundary.break

> def sumOfRoots(number: List[Double]): Option[Double] = boundary {

Reviewer 3: Should we use the braceless syntax?

Reviewer 7: yes please

  val roots = numbers.map { n =>
    println(s" * calculating square root for $n*")
    if n >= 0 then Math.sqrt(n) else break(None)
  }
  Some(roots.sum)
}
```

> When you run the above method, you will notice that it returns None when any of the input elements is negative. Moreover, thanks to `boundary`/`break`, you can see from the console output that it stops the entire process after encountering the first negative element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you run the above method, you will notice that it returns `None` when any of the input elements is negative. Moreover, thanks to `boundary`/`break`, you can see from the console output that it stops the entire process after encountering the first negative element.
```

> When you run the above method, you will notice that it returns None when any of the input elements is negative. Moreover, thanks to `boundary`/`break`, you can see from the console output that it stops the entire process after encountering the first negative element.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When you run the above method, you will notice that it returns `None` when any of the input elements is negative. Moreover, thanks to `boundary`/`break`, you can see from the console output that it stops iterating after encountering the first negative element.
```

> `break` can jump out of the`boundary` in the function deeper on the stack. To make it safe, only functions with a matching `Label` in their using clauses can break. This can be used to create isolated parts of an application with streamlined error handling.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`break` can jump out of the `boundary` in the function deeper on the stack. To make it safe, only functions with a matching `Label` in their using clauses can break. This can be used to create isolated parts of an application with streamlined error handling.
```

> `break` can jump out of the`boundary` in the function deeper on the stack. To make it safe, only functions with a matching `Label` in their using clauses can break. This can be used to create isolated parts of an application with streamlined error handling.

Reviewer 5: From here onwards, IMO the content exceeds what is appropriate for release notes. It instead belongs to the documentation and/or a tutorial/blog post about `boundary/break`.

As it stands, these release notes contain a comparatively large amount of text for something that is way less important than language changes and linting.

Reviewer 7: > IMO the content exceeds what is appropriate for release notes. It instead belongs to the documentation

fwiw, I was thinking similar thoughts and pondering whether to say something.

Library authors can abstract over `break` and `Label`, creating a nice API for error handling or dealing with uncertain data. We can define the following micro-library as a simplified example:

```Scala
import util.boundary, boundary.{ Label, break }

type Uncertain[T] = Label[Left[String, Nothing]] ?=> T

def fail(error: String): Uncertain[Nothing] = break(Left(error))
```

Then it can be used in the following way to create a fragment of a larger application with isolated error handling:

```Scala
def getUser(id: String): Uncertain[User] =
  val user = findUser(id)
  if verifyUser(user) then user else fail("Incorrect user")

def getAddress(user: User): Uncertain[Address] =
  findAddress(user) match
    case Some(address) if verifyAddress(address) => address
    case Some(_) => fail("Incorrect address")
    case None => fail("Missing address")

def getShippingData(id: String): Either[String, (User, Address)] =
  boundary {
    val user = getUser(id)
    val address = getAddress(user)
    Right((user, address))
  }
```

> ### The new default implementation of lazy vals

Reviewer 5: This should come earlier, as it is the only thing that may potentially have an impact on existing codebases during the upgrade process. Everything else is things you can profit from *after* you've upgraded.

In the Scala.js release notes, we have an explicit "Changes with compatibility concerns" section before a "What's new" section. See for example https://www.scala-js.org/news/2023/01/26/announcing-scalajs-1.13.0/. Consider doing the same here.

Reviewer 6: On one hand it will be useful to have a list of things that might cause issues when updating, but maybe we can add it as a later section and let people know at the start?

"For compatibility concerns look to..."

This way we can first focus on things that are most interesting to users?

Also if lazy vals are an internal thing, so maybe it should on be in the same section? Or have a section with `Impactful changes for x.y.z release`? If the new lazy vals are not working then it's a bug and if we say that it's ` compatibility concerns` that might cause people to think that something changed that might make their code stop compiling, while it's actually very unlikely.

Reviewer 5: Yes, sure. At the end of the day, it's a matter of opinion. If you prefer to show the exciting stuff first given those considerations, go for it. ;)

> Last but not least, we have changed the default implementation of lazy vals. The new implementation has better performance and is safer under parallel access. This can lead to improvements in the effect systems performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Last but not least, we have changed the default implementation of lazy vals. The new implementation has better performance and is safer under parallel access. This can lead to performance improvements in the effect systems.
```

(but which effect systems do we talk about?)

Reviewer 7: just "effect systems", not "the effect systems"

Reviewer 8: This may result in improvements in the performance of effect systems.

## Should I update to Scala 3.3.0?

If you are maintaining a standalone Scala 3 project without external projects depending on it, feel free to switch to Scala 3.3.0 at any moment. You will enjoy all the improvements in the newest version of the compiler.

> If you are a library author following semantic versioning, we advise you to update to Scala 3.3.0 in the next minor release of your project. Users of your library would also need to bump their compiler version to use the newest version of your library. If you have already published a minor version on 3.3.0 but learned about a critical vulnerability in your library, you can release a new patch release for the previous minor version of your library using Scala 3.2.2 (or any other version of the compiler you were using previously). This patch can be consumed by all the users of previous versions of the library, no matter if they have already switched to 3.3.0 or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are a library author following semantic versioning, we advise you to update to Scala 3.3.0 in the next minor release of your project. Users of your library would also need to bump their compiler version to use the newest version of your library. If you have already published a minor version on 3.3.0 but learned about a critical vulnerability in your library, you should release a new patch release for the previous minor version of your library using Scala 3.2.2 (or any other older version of the compiler). This patch can be consumed by all the users of previous versions of the library, no matter if they have already switched to 3.3.0 or not.
```

> ### Known incompatibility: Stability of inline parameters

Reviewer 5: This is also for the "Changes with compatibility concerns" section.

You probably want to make it more explicit that this a bug fix (so OK to do in a minor version), but for which we have already noticed existing problems in the wild, and so we're helping users by proactively giving them more information on how to deal with it.

> In Scala, only stable paths can be used as a prefix in the path-dependent type.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In Scala, only stable paths can be used as prefix in path-dependent types.
```

```Scala
class Outer:
  type Inner

val a = new Outer
val aInner: a.Inner = ???     // ok

var b = new Outer
// val bInner: b.Inner = ???  // error

def c = new Outer
// val cInner: c.Inner = ???  // error

def method(param: Outer): param.Inner = ???  // ok
```

There was a bug that resulted in the compiler assuming that all inline parameters are stable references. This could have led to unsound code being accepted by the compiler and potential runtime crashes.

```Scala
inline def method(inline param: Outer): param.Inner // error in Scala 3.3.0
```

> is now not accepted by the compiler. Migration for that change is simple, as it only requires removing the `inline` modifier **from the parameter**. If the path-dependent type was used, it is safe to say that the intended behavior was to inline the method without inlining the parameter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Such pieces of code are now rejected by the compiler. The migration for that change is simple, as it only requires removing the `inline` modifier **from the parameter**. If the path-dependent type was used, it is safe to say that the intended behavior was to inline the method without inlining the parameter.
```
